[WIP] OSDOCS#12884: Manually create RBAC to install an extension (#87627)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/olmv1-creating-a-cluster-role.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * extensions/ce/managing-ce.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

[id="olmv1-creating-a-cluster-role_{context}"]
= Creating a cluster role for an extension

You must review the cluster service version (CSV) and manifests of an extension carefully to define the required role-based access controls (RBAC) for the extension you want to install. You must create a cluster role by copying the required RBAC from the CSV to the new manifest.

> [IMPORTANT]

Reviewer: I don't know if this callout should should a NOTE, IMPORTANT, or a WARNING. It has parts of all three, IMO. It warns about the consequences of not using the permissions in production clusters but also gives guidance on how to test the permissions. 

I wonder if this section could be reworked a little. The language of `You must` made me think that part of those two intro sentences could be placed in the important and perhaps this could be pulled out of the callout and discussed as the intro.

Author: Good point. I'll use the TIP admonition instead. That is probably the right format.

.Prerequisites

* Access to an {product-title} cluster using an account with `cluster-admin` permissions.
* You have downloaded the manifests in the image reference of the extension you want to install.

.Procedure

. Create a new cluster role manifest, similar to the following example:
+
.Example `<extension>-cluster-role.yaml` file
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: <extension>-installer-clusterrole
----

. Edit your cluster role manifest to include permission to update finalizers on the extension, similar to the following example:
+
.Example <extension>-cluster-role.yaml
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: pipelines-installer-clusterrole
rules:
- apiGroups:
  - olm.operatorframework.io
  resources:
  - clusterextensions/finalizers
  verbs:
  - update
  # Scoped to the name of the ClusterExtension
  resourceNames:
  - <metadata_name> # <1>
----
<1> Specifies the value from the `metadata.name` field from the custom resource (CR) of the extension.

> . Search for the `clusterrole` and `clusterrolebindings` values in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest, similar to the following example:

Reviewer: This seems like two steps to me `Search` and `Copy`. Maybe `copy` is a substep?

rules:
# ...
# ClusterRoles and ClusterRoleBindings for the controllers of the extension
- apiGroups:
  - rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  resources:
  - clusterroles
  verbs:
  - create # <1>
  - list
  - watch
- apiGroups:
  - rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  resources:
  - clusterroles
  verbs:
  - get
  - update
  - patch
  - delete
  resourceNames: # <2>
  - "*"
- apiGroups:
  - rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  resources:
  - clusterrolebindings
  verbs:
  - create
  - list
  - watch
- apiGroups:
  - rbac.authorization.k8s.io
  resources:
  - clusterrolebindings
  verbs:
  - get
  - update
  - patch
  - delete
  resourceNames:
  - "*"
# ...
----
<1> You cannot scope `create`, `list`, and `watch` permissions to specific resource names (the `resourceNames` field). You must scope these permissions to their resources (the `resources` field).
<2> Some resource names are generated by using the following format: `<package_name>.<hash>`. After you install the extension, look up the resource names for the cluster roles and cluster role bindings for the controller of the extension. Replace the wildcard characters in this example with the generated names and follow the principle of least privilege.

> . Search for the `customresourcesdefinition` value in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest, similar to the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Search for the `customresourcesdefinitions` value in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest, similar to the following example:
```

> . Search for the `customresourcesdefinition` value in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest, similar to the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Find the `customresourcesdefinitions` value in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file, and copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names into your manifest, similar to the following example:
```

Reviewer: Maybe something like this works?

Author: I went with the subbullet approach. That sentence would be way to long for my liking. I'm already fighting to keep this below an 11th grade reading level. :)

> . Search for the `customresourcesdefinition` value in the `rules.resources` field in the extension's CSV file. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest, similar to the following example:

Author: good catch on the typo. Should be `customresourcedefinition`.

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: pipelines-installer-clusterrole
rules:
# ...
# Custom resource definitions of the extension
- apiGroups:
  - apiextensions.k8s.io
  resources:
  - customresourcedefinitions
  verbs:
  - create
  - list
  - watch
- apiGroups:
  - apiextensions.k8s.io
  resources:
  - customresourcedefinitions
  verbs:
  - get
  - update
  - patch
  - delete
  resourceNames:
  - manualapprovalgates.operator.tekton.dev
  - openshiftpipelinesascodes.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonaddons.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonchains.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonconfigs.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonhubs.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektoninstallersets.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonpipelines.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektonresults.operator.tekton.dev
  - tektontriggers.operator.tekton.dev
# ...
----

> . Search the CSV file for stanzas with the `permissions` and `clusterPermissions` values in the `rules.resources` spec. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest.

Reviewer: Whatever you decide I'd stay consistent like you are throughout here.

> . Search the CSV file for stanzas with the `permissions` and `clusterPermissions` values in the `rules.resources` spec. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Search the CSV file for stanzas with the `permissions` and `clusterPermissions` values in the `rules.resources` specification. Copy the API groups, resources, verbs, and resource names to your manifest.
```

Reviewer: I don't think I've seen .spec used as a noun like that before. You could do the `.spec.rules.resources` field/value.

Author: "Spec" is in the repo glossary: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/blob/main/contributing_to_docs/term_glossary.adoc#spec

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * extensions/ce/managing-ce.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

[id="olmv1-creating-a-cluster-role_{context}"]

> = Creating a cluster role for an extension

Reviewer 2: @michaelryanpeter I do not understand why only clusterole(binding) is created.

per https://operator-framework.github.io/operator-controller/howto/derive-service-account/, some of them could be created as role(binding).

by the way, https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/blob/main/config/samples/olm_v1_clusterextension.yamlhas argocd-installer-role, argocd-installer-clusterrole, and argocd-installer-rbac-clusterrole. I am ok to combine argocd-installer-rbac-clusterrole and argocd-installer-clusterrole into one clusterrole as argocd-installer-clusterrole because they are clusterrole. I guess it is what you do in this PR.

Author: This was very difficult for me to do, and I had I to figure it out on my own. I did use the upstream docs as a guide though. 

When I looked at the CSV for the pipelines Operator, I could not tell which resources should be namespace scoped. I did notice the one instance of the `role` resource here: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/87627/files#diff-d6ea754a5b22ac27d3638ea281b18cbb03eedb0fd76abb2efe926684b6b382e8R161

I had to fail a lot of times to get permissions that would install. Please let me know if there is a better way to organize or break up the permissions: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/87627/files#diff-d6ea754a5b22ac27d3638ea281b18cbb03eedb0fd76abb2efe926684b6b382e8

Reviewer 2: @michaelryanpeter frankly I have no better way to identify which is role and which is clusterrole. I think it is also difficult for customer. maybe query with SME (@joelanford ?) on it.  thanks

Reviewer 3: @kuiwang02 Good spotting that some of the permissions can be scoped to just the install Namespace.
I've talked with @michaelryanpeter today and I advised to just add a notice for now that the example permissions could be restricted further and improve the fidelity of the examples in the next iteration.

This feature is _very_ complex to use as-is and I am not sure that further complicating the examples is worth it at this time. @perdasilva has already started tinkering with a tool to auto-generate these permissions and ease the burden on the administrator significantly.

Additionally we are going to have to revisit this doc anyway with the upcoming Single/OwnNamespace install-mode support in mind, because that feature also impacts how much RBAC can be restricted.

Author: Added an admonition to clarify that the examples rely on cluster roles for example purposes in this commit: https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/87627/commits/7cee26fbeaf56af6ea948a3862d3e31af60ffeea

Author: @kuiwang02 Would you please take another look?

Reviewer 2: @thetechnick @michaelryanpeter Thanks. 

/lgtm
